README.md, before:

# Console Chat with MCP

This repository contains a console based chat client built with **Microsoft.Extensions.AI** and an example **Model Context Protocol (MCP)** server. The chat client can talk to language models or fall back to a simple echo bot. The MCP server exposes simple C# functions as tools that can be invoked from the chat.

![Screenshot of the Console Chat application in action, showing a conversation with syntax highlighting and a tool call response.](assets/README/console-chat-terminal.png)

## Projects

- **SemanticKernelChat** – Console application that hosts the chat client and automatically starts any configured MCP server.
- **McpServer** – Example MCP server exposing a few utility tools.
- **ConsoleChat.Tests** – Unit tests covering the tool implementations and MCP integration.

Both applications target **.NET 8** and are included in the `ConsoleChat.sln` solution file.

### Solution layout

```
ConsoleChat.sln
├── SemanticKernelChat/     # main chat client
│   ├── Commands/           # Spectre.Console CLI commands
│   ├── Console/            # UI and controller classes
│   ├── Clients/            # implementations of IChatClient
│   ├── Infrastructure/     # MCP helpers and DI extensions
│   └── Helpers/            # provider utilities
├── McpServer/              # example MCP server with tools
└── ConsoleChat.Tests/      # xUnit test project
```

This layout keeps the chat client, tool server, and tests separated while still
belonging to the same solution. Exploring each folder is a good way to get
familiar with the architecture.

## Building

Restore dependencies and build all projects:

```bash
# from the repository root
 dotnet restore ConsoleChat.sln
 dotnet build ConsoleChat.sln
```

Run the unit tests with:

```bash
 dotnet test ConsoleChat.sln -v minimal
```

## Running the MCP server

The server can be started on its own and listens via standard input/output so that clients can connect using the MCP protocol:

```bash
 dotnet run --project McpServer
```

It registers all tools in the `McpServer` assembly. Example tools include `CurrentTime`, `ToUpper`, and `Add`.

The chat client itself exposes a few rich rendering helpers implemented as Semantic Kernel functions:

- `RenderTable` – shows a `Table` of fruit counts.
- `RenderTree` – displays a small `Tree` structure.
- `RenderChart` – renders a `BarChart` of fruit sales.

When invoked from chat these functions write directly to the console via `ChatConsole`.

## Running the chat client

Launch the console chat application with:

```bash
 dotnet run --project SemanticKernelChat
```

The Spectre.Console CLI registers commands that can be invoked by name. For
example the default command `chat-stream` can be launched explicitly:

```bash
dotnet run --project SemanticKernelChat chat-stream
```

The client starts any configured MCP transports (by default it launches the `McpServer` project) and then enters an interactive chat loop. Commands available are:

- `chat-stream` *(default)* – Streaming responses as they are generated.
- `chat` – Waits for the full response before printing.
- `text-completion` – Single-shot completion via `--query`.

Type `exit` on an empty line to quit.

The editor remembers your previous inputs. Use the **Up** and **Down** arrows to
cycle through earlier messages. Set the `CHAT_HISTORY_FILE` environment variable
to persist this history across sessions.

### Spectre Console

The console client relies on [Spectre.Console](https://spectreconsole.net/) for
rich terminal output such as panels, spinners, and command parsing. Specify the
desired command alias when launching the application. Running without an alias
starts `chat`.

```bash
dotnet publish SemanticKernelChat -c Release -o out
./out/SemanticKernelChat chat
./out/SemanticKernelChat
```

### Architecture and Clean Code

The console application follows a simple Model-View-Controller pattern.
`ChatConsole` is responsible purely for rendering chat messages and
reading user input (the **View**). All orchestration logic that calls
the AI client lives in `ChatController` (the **Controller**), which
interacts with `IChatHistoryService` as the **Model**. This separation
makes the UI independent of the underlying chat provider and keeps each
class focused on a single responsibility.

### Configuration

`SemanticKernelChat` uses the standard .NET configuration system. Place an `appsettings.json` file next to the executable or in the project directory to configure the underlying chat provider. When no provider is configured an echo bot is used.

Example `appsettings.json`:

```json
{
  "Provider": "OpenAI",
  "OPENAI_API_KEY": "your-api-key",
  "OpenAI": {
    "ModelId": "gpt-3.5-turbo"
  },
  "Ollama": {
    "ModelId": "llama3",
    "BaseUrl": "http://localhost:11434"
  },
  "AwsBedrock": {
    "ModelId": "anthropic.claude-3-sonnet-20240229-v1:0",
    "RoleArn": "arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/BedrockAccess"
  }
}
```

Set `Provider` to `OpenAI`, `Ollama`, or `AwsBedrock` and adjust the nested section with the required options. For OpenAI the API key may also be supplied via the `OPENAI_API_KEY` environment variable. The `Ollama` section uses the [OllamaSharp](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OllamaSharp) package and accepts an optional `BaseUrl` for remote servers.

The MCP server itself only uses the default logging configuration. Its `appsettings.json` looks like:

```json
{
  "Logging": {
    "LogLevel": {
      "Default": "Information",
      "Microsoft.AspNetCore": "Warning"
    }
  },
  "AllowedHosts": "*"
}
```

### Getting started in the codebase

Key entry points include:

- `Program.cs` in **SemanticKernelChat** – wires up the command-line host and dependency injection.
- `ChatController` – orchestrates messages between the console UI and the configured chat client.
- `McpServer` project – exposes example tools that can be invoked from chat.

Exploring these components is a good way to understand how the client and server communicate. The test project contains additional usage examples and is a helpful reference when extending the toolset.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Clarify servers and expand docs

README.md, after:

# Console Chat with MCP

This repository contains a console based chat client built with **Microsoft.Extensions.AI** and an example **Model Context Protocol (MCP)** server. The chat client can talk to language models or fall back to a simple echo bot. The MCP server exposes simple C# functions as tools that can be invoked from the chat.

![Screenshot of the Console Chat application in action, showing a conversation with syntax highlighting and a tool call response.](assets/README/console-chat-terminal.png)

## Projects

- **SemanticKernelChat** – Console application that hosts the chat client and automatically starts any configured MCP server.
- **McpServer** – Example MCP server exposing a few utility tools.
- **RaindropServer** – Optional MCP server for managing Raindrop.io bookmarks.
- **ConsoleChat.Tests** – Unit tests covering the tool implementations and MCP integration.
- **RaindropServer.Tests** – Tests focused on the Raindrop API wrappers.

Both applications target **.NET 8** and are included in the `ConsoleChat.sln` solution file.

### Solution layout

```
ConsoleChat.sln
├── SemanticKernelChat/     # main chat client
│   ├── Commands/           # Spectre.Console CLI commands
│   ├── Console/            # UI and controller classes
│   ├── Clients/            # implementations of IChatClient
│   ├── Infrastructure/     # MCP helpers and DI extensions
│   └── Helpers/            # provider utilities
├── McpServer/              # example MCP server with tools
├── RaindropServer/         # server wrapping the Raindrop.io API
├── ConsoleChat.Tests/      # xUnit test project
└── RaindropServer.Tests/   # tests for the Raindrop server
```

This layout keeps the chat client, tool server, and tests separated while still
belonging to the same solution. Exploring each folder is a good way to get
familiar with the architecture.

## Building

Restore dependencies and build all projects:

```bash
# from the repository root
 dotnet restore ConsoleChat.sln
 dotnet build ConsoleChat.sln
```

Run the unit tests with:

```bash
 dotnet test ConsoleChat.sln -v minimal
```

## Running the MCP server

An MCP server can be started on its own and listens via standard input/output so that clients can connect using the protocol. Two servers are included:

- `McpServer` – basic demo tools like echo and math helpers.
- `RaindropServer` – wraps the Raindrop.io API for bookmark management.

Start either server with `dotnet run --project <ServerName>`:

```bash
 dotnet run --project McpServer
```

The example above launches `McpServer`. Replace the project name with `RaindropServer` to access bookmark tools. `McpServer` registers simple utilities like `CurrentTime`, `ToUpper`, and `Add`.

Recent additions provide more Raindrop management helpers:

- **Bulk bookmark deletion** – remove multiple items at once by moving them to the Trash.
- **Tag merging** – consolidate duplicate tags into a single name.
- **Trash cleanup** – permanently empty the Trash collection.
- **Filter retrieval** – fetch available tags and other filter metrics for a collection.

`RaindropServer` groups these operations into tool classes that mirror the Raindrop.io REST API. Tools exist for collections, bookmarks, tags, highlights, filters and user info, making it possible to fully manage your account from chat.

The chat client itself exposes a few rich rendering helpers implemented as Semantic Kernel functions:

- `RenderTable` – shows a `Table` of fruit counts.
- `RenderTree` – displays a small `Tree` structure.
- `RenderChart` – renders a `BarChart` of fruit sales.

When invoked from chat these functions write directly to the console via `ChatConsole`.

## Running the chat client

Launch the console chat application with:

```bash
 dotnet run --project SemanticKernelChat
```

The Spectre.Console CLI registers commands that can be invoked by name. For
example the default command `chat-stream` can be launched explicitly:

```bash
dotnet run --project SemanticKernelChat chat-stream
```

The client starts any configured MCP transports (by default it launches the `McpServer` project) and then enters an interactive chat loop. Commands available are:

- `chat-stream` *(default)* – Streaming responses as they are generated.
- `chat` – Waits for the full response before printing.
- `text-completion` – Single-shot completion via `--query`.

Type `exit` on an empty line to quit.

The editor remembers your previous inputs. Use the **Up** and **Down** arrows to
cycle through earlier messages. Set the `CHAT_HISTORY_FILE` environment variable
to persist this history across sessions.

### Spectre Console

The console client relies on [Spectre.Console](https://spectreconsole.net/) for
rich terminal output such as panels, spinners, and command parsing. Specify the
desired command alias when launching the application. Running without an alias
starts `chat`.

```bash
dotnet publish SemanticKernelChat -c Release -o out
./out/SemanticKernelChat chat
./out/SemanticKernelChat
```

### Architecture and Clean Code

The console application follows a simple Model-View-Controller pattern.
`ChatConsole` is responsible purely for rendering chat messages and
reading user input (the **View**). All orchestration logic that calls
the AI client lives in `ChatController` (the **Controller**), which
interacts with `IChatHistoryService` as the **Model**. This separation
makes the UI independent of the underlying chat provider and keeps each
class focused on a single responsibility.

### Configuration

`SemanticKernelChat` uses the standard .NET configuration system. Place an `appsettings.json` file next to the executable or in the project directory to configure the underlying chat provider. When no provider is configured an echo bot is used.

Example `appsettings.json`:

```json
{
  "Provider": "OpenAI",
  "OPENAI_API_KEY": "your-api-key",
  "OpenAI": {
    "ModelId": "gpt-3.5-turbo"
  },
  "Ollama": {
    "ModelId": "llama3",
    "BaseUrl": "http://localhost:11434"
  },
  "AwsBedrock": {
    "ModelId": "anthropic.claude-3-sonnet-20240229-v1:0",
    "RoleArn": "arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/BedrockAccess"
  }
}
```

Set `Provider` to `OpenAI`, `Ollama`, or `AwsBedrock` and adjust the nested section with the required options. For OpenAI the API key may also be supplied via the `OPENAI_API_KEY` environment variable. The `Ollama` section uses the [OllamaSharp](https://www.nuget.org/packages/OllamaSharp) package and accepts an optional `BaseUrl` for remote servers.

The MCP server itself only uses the default logging configuration. Its `appsettings.json` looks like:

```json
{
  "Logging": {
    "LogLevel": {
      "Default": "Information",
      "Microsoft.AspNetCore": "Warning"
    }
  },
  "AllowedHosts": "*"
}
```

### Getting started in the codebase

Key entry points include:

- `Program.cs` in **SemanticKernelChat** – wires up the command-line host and dependency injection.
- `ChatController` – orchestrates messages between the console UI and the configured chat client.
- `McpServer` project – exposes example tools that can be invoked from chat.
- `RaindropServer` project – exposes bookmark management tools powered by the Raindrop API.
- Numerous request record types model API payloads, such as `RaindropCreateRequest`, `TagRenameRequest`, and `HighlightBulkUpdateRequest`.

Exploring these components is a good way to understand how the client and server communicate. The test project contains additional usage examples and is a helpful reference when extending the toolset.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
